 Question: What are system pods in AKS?

Answer:

System pods are Kubernetes infrastructure components like CoreDNS, kube-proxy, and metrics-server that run in the kube-system namespace and maintain cluster networking, DNS, and monitoring. In AKS, these pods typically run on system node pools to ensure cluster stability.


System Node Pool (3 nodes)
   ├── CoreDNS
   ├── kube-proxy
   ├── metrics-server
   └── Azure storage drivers

User Node Pool (5 nodes)
   ├── frontend service
   ├── backend API
   ├── worker jobs
   └── databases

question difference docker and kubernates
ans- Docker is a containerization platform that allows you to create, deploy, and run applications in containers. 
It provides a way to package applications and their dependencies into a single unit that can run
consistently across different environments. 
Kubernetes, on the other hand, is a container orchestration platform that manages the deployment, scaling, 
and operation of containerized applications across a cluster of machines.

question - what is  architectural components of kubernates
ans- The architectural components of Kubernetes include:
1. Master Node: The control plane of the Kubernetes cluster that manages the cluster and makes global decisions about the cluster.
2. Worker Nodes: The nodes that run the containerized applications and are managed by the master node.
3. API Server: The component that exposes the Kubernetes API and serves as the entry point for all administrative tasks.
4. etcd: A distributed key-value store that stores the cluster's state and configuration data.
5. Controller Manager: The component that runs controllers to manage the desired state of the cluster and ensure that the cluster is running as expected.
6. Scheduler: The component that assigns workloads to worker nodes based on resource availability and other constraints.
7. Kubelet: The agent that runs on each worker node and ensures that the containers are running in a
pod and reports the status back to the master node.
8. Kube-proxy: The component that runs on each worker node and manages network communication between pods and services, providing load balancing and service discovery. 
9. Container Runtime: The software that runs and manages the containers on each worker node, such as Docker or containerd.
10. cloud controller manager: The component that manages cloud-specific resources and integrates with cloud providers to manage resources like load balancers, storage, and networking.


question - what is kubernates controller
ans - kubernates controll is resposible for maintaining the desired state of the cluster by
 monitoring the current state and making necessary adjustments. 
 It ensures that the specified number of replicas are running, 
 manages deployments, and handles scaling and updates to applications.

Question- how many controller we have in kubernates
ans - there are several controllers in Kubernetes, including:
1. ReplicaSet Controller
2. Deployment Controller
3. StatefulSet Controller
4. DaemonSet Controller
5. Job Controller
6. CronJob Controller
7. Node Controller
8. Service Controller
9. Endpoint Controller
10. Namespace Controller
11. PersistentVolume Controller
12. PersistentVolumeClaim Controller
13. Horizontal Pod Autoscaler Controller
14. Ingress Controller
15. Network Policy Controller
16. ResourceQuota Controller
17. ServiceAccount Controller
18. ConfigMap Controller
19. Secret Controller
20. Event Controller
21. Garbage Collector Controller
22. Certificate Controller
23. Custom Resource Controller (for CRDs) 

question- what is service in k8s
ans - A service in Kubernetes is an abstraction that defines a logical set of pods and a policy
by which to access them. It provides a stable IP address and DNS name for a set of pods, allowing for load balancing 
and service discovery within the cluster. Services enable communication between different components of 
an application and can also expose applications to external traffic.


Question - how many services in k8s
ans - there are several types of services in Kubernetes, including:
1. ClusterIP: Exposes the service on a cluster-internal IP. This is the default type and is only accessible within the cluster.
2. NodePort: Exposes the service on each node's IP at a static port. This allows external traffic to access the service using <NodeIP>:<NodePort>.
3. LoadBalancer: Provisions an external load balancer (if supported by the cloud provider) and assigns a public IP to the service, allowing external traffic to access the service.
4. ExternalName: Maps the service to an external DNS name, allowing access to services outside the cluster using a CNAME record.
5. Headless Service: A service without a cluster IP, used for stateful applications where clients need to connect directly to individual pods.  

question  what is CNAME record in DNS
ans - A CNAME (Canonical Name) record in DNS is a type of resource record that maps an alias name to a canonical name. It allows you to point 
multiple domain names to the same IP address or another domain name.
 For example, if you have a service running at "service.example

question- when these services are used in k8s cluster
ans- ClusterIP is used for internal communication between services within the cluster. 
      NodePort is used when you want to expose a service to external traffic without using a load balancer.
      LoadBalancer is used when you want to expose a service to external traffic and your cloud provider supports automatic load balancer provisioning.
      ExternalName is used when you want to access an external service from within the cluster using a DNS name.
      Headless Service is used for stateful applications where clients need to connect directly to individual pods, 
      such as databases or stateful applications that require stable network identities.


question - if api-server is down how we can create depolyment 
ans - If the API server is down, you will not be able to create a deployment using kubectl 
      or any other Kubernetes client, as the API server is responsible for processing and handling 
      all requests to the cluster. 
      2️⃣ Static Pods (Workaround)
      Even if the API Server is down, kubelet can still create Static Pods directly from the node filesystem.

      Steps:
      SSH to the worker node
      Place pod manifest inside:
      /etc/kubernetes/manifests/
      Kubelet will automatically create the pod from the manifest, allowing you to run a deployment without the API Server.
      Note: But this creates only a Pod, not a Deployment. This is a workaround and not a recommended practice for production environments, as it bypasses the Kubernetes control plane and can lead to inconsistencies in cluster state.

question - what is difference b/w replica set and deployment 
ans-  Replica set is kubernates controller and it is maintain the desire set of copy should we 
running on the cluster to maintain the auto healing process in kubernates, whereas deployement 
is the combination od pod and replica set when deplyement is created it will create the replica set and 
replica set will create the pod and maintain the desired state of pod in kubernates cluster


question- what is stateful and stateless set in k8s 
ans - StatelessSet is a Kubernetes controller that manages stateless applications.
      It ensures that a specified number of replicas of a pod are running at any given time, 
      but it does not maintain any state or identity for the pods. 
     Each pod created by a StatelessSet is interchangeable and can be replaced without affecting the overall application. 
     It is typically used for applications that do not require persistent storage or unique network identities, 
     such as web servers or API services.
     
     Each pod created by a StatefulSet has a unique identity and is assigned a stable network identity, 
     which allows it to maintain state across restarts and rescheduling. 
     StatefulSet is typically used for applications that require persistent storage or unique network identities, 
     such as databases or stateful applications that require stable network identities.


question - what is Demaon set and statefull set 
ans- DaemonSet is a Kubernetes controller that ensures that a copy of a specific pod runs on all or 
     some nodes in the cluster. It is typically used for running system-level services, such as log collection or monitoring agents, on every node. 
     When a new node is added to the cluster, the DaemonSet automatically creates a pod on that node to ensure that the service is running everywhere.
     StatefulSet, on the other hand, is a Kubernetes controller that manages stateful applications.   

question - what is difference b/w stateful set and deployment
ans - The main difference between StatefulSet and Deployment in Kubernetes is that StatefulSet is designed for 
      managing stateful applications,while Deployment is designed for managing stateless applications.





question - what is event controller in k8s
ans- The Event Controller in Kubernetes is responsible for monitoring and managing events that occur within the cluster.
   It collects and processes events generated by various components of the cluster, such as pods, nodes, and services. 
   The Event Controller helps in tracking the state changes and activities within the cluster, providing insights into the health 
   and performance of the applications running on Kubernetes. 
   It can be used for debugging, monitoring, and alerting purposes to ensure the smooth operation of the cluster.

question - what is side car containers 
ans- Sidecar containers are auxiliary containers that run alongside the main application container in a Kubernetes pod. 
   They provide additional functionality or support to the main container, such as logging, monitoring, or proxying. 
   Sidecar containers share the same network namespace and storage volumes as the main container, 
   allowing them to interact closely with the main application. 
   They are commonly used for tasks like log collection, service discovery, or handling communication between microservices.


question - how can achive the horizental auto scaling 
ans- Horizontal Pod Autoscaling (HPA) in Kubernetes can be achieved by using the `kubectl autoscale` command or by defining an HPA resource in a YAML file. 
   HPA automatically scales the number of pod replicas based on observed CPU utilization or other custom metrics. 
   For example, you can run `kubectl autoscale deployment my-deployment --min=1 --max=10 --cpu-percent=50` to create an HPA that scales the "my-deployment" 
   deployment between 1 and 10 replicas based on CPU usage. 
   Alternatively, you can define an HPA resource in a YAML file and apply it to the cluster using `kubectl apply -f hpa.yaml`.

question - what api gateway 
ans- An API Gateway is a server that acts as an intermediary between clients and backend services. 
   It provides a single entry point for all client requests and can perform various functions such as request routing, 
   authentication, rate limiting, and load balancing. 
   In the context of Kubernetes, an API Gateway can be implemented using an Ingress controller or a service mesh to manage and route traffic to different services within the cluster.
   It helps in abstracting the underlying services and provides a unified interface for clients to interact with the applications running in the Kubernetes cluster.

question - what are ingress controller
ans- Ingress controllers are responsible for managing and routing external traffic to services within a Kubernetes cluster.
   They provide a way to expose HTTP and HTTPS routes from outside the cluster to services within the cluster. 
   Ingress controllers typically use rules defined in Ingress resources to determine how to route traffic to the 
   appropriate services based on hostnames, paths, and other criteria. 
   They can also provide features like SSL termination, load balancing, and authentication for incoming traffic.
   It is providing the single entry point for all incoming traffic to the cluster and can route requests to 
   different services based on the defined rules in the Ingress resource.
   It is providing Enterprise level features like SSL termination, load balancing, and authentication for incoming traffic to the cluster 
   which is not provided by the default Kubernetes services like ClusterIP, NodePort, or LoadBalancer.


question - what is difference b/w ingress controller and api gateway
ans- The main difference between an Ingress controller and an API Gateway is that an Ingress 
     controller is a Kubernetes-specific component that manages and routes external traffic to services within a Kubernetes cluster, \
     while an API Gateway is a more general concept that can be implemented in various environments to provide a single entry point 
     for client requests and manage interactions with backend services. 
   Ingress controllers are focused on routing HTTP and HTTPS traffic based on rules defined in Ingress resources, 
   while API Gateways can provide additional functionalities such as authentication, rate limiting, and load balancing across different types of protocols and services.

question - crash loop backoff in k8s
ans- CrashLoopBackOff is a status in Kubernetes that indicates a pod is repeatedly crashing and restarting. 
   It occurs when a container in the pod fails to start successfully, and Kubernetes attempts to restart it, but it continues to fail. 
   The "BackOff" part of the status indicates that Kubernetes is applying an exponential backoff strategy to avoid overwhelming the system with constant restarts. 
   To troubleshoot a CrashLoopBackOff, you can check the logs of the affected pod using `kubectl logs <pod-name>` to identify the cause of the failure and take appropriate actions to resolve it.

   main reasons for CrashLoopBackOff include:
   1. Application errors: The application running in the container may have bugs or issues that cause it to crash.
   2. Resource constraints: The container may be running out of memory or CPU, leading to crashes.
   3. Misconfiguration: Incorrect environment variables, command-line arguments, or other configuration issues can cause the container to fail.
   4. Dependency failures: If the container relies on external services or resources that are unavailable, it may crash.
   5. Health check failures: If the liveness or readiness probes are misconfigured, they may cause the container to be marked as unhealthy and restarted.   


question - what is liveness probe and readiness probe in k8s
ans- Liveness probe is used to determine if a container is still healthy and functioning properly.
     If the liveness probe fails, Kubernetes will restart the container to try to recover it.
     Readiness probe is used to determine if a container is ready to accept traffic. 
     It checks the health of the application and only routes traffic to the container when it is ready. 
     Both probes are essential for ensuring the reliability and availability of applications running in Kubernetes.

question - how to controll the resource utilization in k8s pod 
ans- To control resource utilization in a Kubernetes pod, you can specify resource requests and limits in the pod's YAML configuration. 
   Resource requests define the minimum amount of CPU and memory that a container needs to run, while resource limits set the maximum amount of CPU and memory that a container can use. 
   For example, you can add the following to your pod specification:
   ```
   resources:
     requests:
       cpu: "500m"
       memory: "256Mi"
     limits:
       cpu: "1"
       memory: "512Mi"
   ```
   This configuration ensures that the container will request 500 millicores of CPU and 256 MiB of memory, and it will not be allowed to use more than 1 CPU core and 512 MiB of memory. 
   By setting appropriate resource requests and limits, you can help ensure that your applications run efficiently and prevent resource contention in the cluster.

question - when to use resouce ResourceQuota in k8s
ans- ResourceQuota is used in Kubernetes to limit the amount of resources that can be consumed by a namespace. 
      It is typically used in multi-tenant environments or when you want to enforce resource limits   on a specific namespace to prevent any single team or application from consuming excessive resources and impacting the overall performance of the cluster.
      By defining a ResourceQuota, you can set limits on CPU, memory, storage, and other resources for all the pods, services, and other resources created within that namespace. 
      This helps in managing resource allocation and ensuring fair usage across different teams or applications running in the same cluster.
 
question - what is tolerace in k8s 
ans- Toleration in Kubernetes is a mechanism that allows pods to be scheduled on nodes with specific taints. 
   Taints are applied to nodes to repel certain pods, while tolerations are applied to pods to allow them to tolerate those taints 
   and be scheduled on the nodes. 
   This is useful for controlling which pods can run on which nodes based on specific conditions or requirements, 
   such as running certain workloads on dedicated hardware or isolating critical applications from less important ones.
   for example, if a node has a taint that repels all pods except those with a specific toleration,
    only pods with that toleration will be scheduled on that node.

question - what is node affinity and pod affinity in k8s
ans- Node affinity and pod affinity are scheduling constraints in Kubernetes that allow you to control where pods are scheduled based on certain criteria. 
   Node affinity allows you to specify rules for scheduling pods on specific nodes based on node labels,
    while pod affinity allows you to specify rules for scheduling pods based on the labels of other pods. 
   Both node affinity and pod affinity can be used to ensure that certain workloads are scheduled together or apart based on their requirements or characteristics.

question - what is difference b/w configmap and secret in k8s
ans - ConfigMap is used to store non-sensitive configuration data in key-value pairs, while Secret is used to store sensitive information such as passwords, API keys, and certificates. 
   ConfigMaps are typically used for application configuration, while Secrets are used for sensitive data that needs to be protected. 
   Both ConfigMaps and Secrets can be mounted as volumes or exposed as environment variables in pods, but Secrets are encoded and stored securely to prevent unauthorized access.

question - how to create secret in k8s

question- how to get all resource in k8s cluster
 ans- kubectl get all --all-namespaces
      kubectl get all -A

question - how to get all resource in k8s cluster with specific label
ans- kubectl get all -l app=nginx --all-namespaces

question how to get pod ip address in k8s cluster
ans- kubectl get pod -o wide 

question - how to get node ip address in k8s cluster
ans- kubectl get nodes -o wide

question - how to login to pod 
ans- kubectl exec -it <pod-name> -- /bin/bash

question - how to get login to node in k8s cluster
ans- kubectl get nodes
      kubectl describe node <node-name>
      ssh <node-ip-address>

question- what is readyness probe and liveness probe in k8s
ans- Readiness probe is used to determine if a container is ready to accept traffic. 
     It checks the health of the application and only routes traffic to the container when it is ready. 
     Liveness probe, on the other hand, is used to determine if a container is still healthy and functioning properly. 
     If the liveness probe fails, Kubernetes will restart the container to try to recover it. 
     Both probes are essential for ensuring the reliability and availability of applications running in Kubernetes.



questing- in deployment how can get the images which is there azure container registry
ans- To get the images from Azure Container Registry (ACR) in a Kubernetes deployment, you can follow these steps:
1. Create a Kubernetes secret to store the ACR credentials:
```bash
kubectl create secret docker-registry acr-secret --docker-server=<ACR_NAME>.azurecry.io --docker-username=<ACR_USERNAME> 
--docker-password=<ACR_PASSWORD> --docker-email=<EMAIL_ADDRESS>
```
2. In your deployment YAML file, specify the image from ACR and reference the secret for authentication:
```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
   name: my-deployment  
spec:
   replicas: 3
   selector:
       matchLabels:
           app: my-app
   template:
       metadata:
           labels:     
               app: my-app
         spec:
           containers:
           - name: my-container
             image: <ACR_NAME>.azurecr.io/my-image:latest
           imagePullSecrets:
           - name: acr-secret
```
3. Apply the deployment to your Kubernetes cluster:
```bashkubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
```
This will allow your Kubernetes deployment to pull the specified image from Azure Container Registry using the provided credentials stored in the secret.



